In this post I'd like to make a quick overview of [SDKMAN!](http://sdkman.io/), the tool I use to manage SDKs. Most of the content, if not all, is already present in its [website](http://sdkman.io/). I just aim to make a straightforward introduction to it but all credit goes to its maintainer, [Marco Vermeulen](https://github.com/marc0der).

## Highlights
* It makes life easier. There's no need to mess with environment variables such as `PATH`
* It's multi-platform
* There are many SDKs available: Java, Scala, Groovy, Spring Boot and more
* And also build tools such as Maven, Sbt or Gradle
* It allows to manage multiple versions of each one
* Lightweight: it's written in `bash` and only requires `curl` and `unzip` to run

## Installation
Installing SDKMAN! just requires opening a terminal and entering:
```bash
curl -s "https://get.sdkman.io" | bash
```
This will download and install SDKMAN! in `$HOME/.sdkman` by default. The associated CLI command is `sdk`.

## Usage
There are mainly two kinds of commands available in `sdk`:
* Commands to manage candidates (SDKs and other tools):
  * `install` or `i`: install a candidate version
  * `uninstall` or `rm`: uninstall a candidate version
  * `list` or `ls`: list available candidate versions
  * `use` or `u`: use a candidate version in current shell
  * `default` or `d`: set the default candidate version for every shell
  * `current` `c`: display current candidate version
  * `upgrade` or `ug`: upgrade outdated candidate version
* Utility commands:
  * `version` or `v`: display the current version of sdk
  * `broadcast` or `b`: display the last broadcast message
  * `help` or `h`: show the sdk help message
  * `offline`: enable or disable offline mode
  * `selfupdate`: update the sdk
  * `flush`: flush sdk local state

The most relevant and interesting are the ones to manage candidates.

With `sdk list` we can list all the available candidates. These are the ones currently available:
* Activator
* Ant
* AsciidoctorJ
* Ceylon
* CRaSH
* Gaiden
* Glide
* Gradle
* Grails
* Griffon
* Groovy
* GroovyServ
* Java
* JBake
* JBoss Forge
* Kobalt
* Kotlin
* Lazybones
* Leiningen
* Maven
* sbt
* Scala
* Spring Boot
* Sshoogr
* Vert.x

For example, let's say we want to install the [Scala](https://www.scala-lang.org/) SDK. First we can list the available Scala versions by running `sdk list scala`:
```bash
==========================
Available Scala Versions
==========================
     2.12.1
     2.12.0
     2.11.8
     2.11.7
     2.11.6
     2.11.5
     2.11.4
     2.11.3
     2.11.2
     2.11.1
     2.11.0

==========================
+ - local version
* - installed
> - currently in use
==========================
```

If we just want the latest version, all we need to do is run `sdk install scala`, but if we want to install a specific version we can specify it as well by running `sdk install scala 2.12.0`.

When having multiple versions installed, `sdk current scala` will show the current version in use. Then, running `sdk use scala 2.12.0` will switch the candidate version for the current terminal. On the other hand, running `sdk default scala 2.12.0` will make the switch global and permanent.

## In conclusion
That's pretty much all you need to start using SDKMAN!. I have nothing against installing the SDKs through the *official* channels but if you use many of them at the same time, keeping them up to date and managing multiple versions of each one can become a pain.

This tool surely makes it easier.
